WAITING FOR RELEASE: Hardhat zksync upgradable plugin (#422)
matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs: docs/api/hardhat/hardhat-zksync-upgradable.md

The upgradable plugin saves this information in the manifest file. This file will be created in your project's `.upgradable` folder. The manifest file is created per network, meaning you will have different data saved for upgrading contracts on the local setup and zkSync Era networks.

# Upgrading proxies

## Validations

In order for a smart contract implementation to be upgradable, it has to follow specific [rules](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/upgrades-plugins/1.x/writing-upgradeable).

:::warning
- The current version of the `hardhat-zksync-upgradable` plugin does **NOT** support all the validation checks.
- This means that it is the users responsibility to check if the new implementation they want to upgrade follows the predefined standards.
- At the time of writing, we are working on implementing those checks within the plugin itself, and the plan for subsequent releases is to support them natively.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::

```

Reviewer: just adding the closing for admonition here

Currently we support smart contract upgrades compiled with zksolc 1.3.7 version.
:::

# Deploying Proxies

The plugin supports two types of proxy: Transparent upgradable proxies and beacon proxies.

Upgradability methods are all part of the `zkUpgrades` property in the `HardhatRuntimeEnvironment` and you only need to interact with it in order to deploy or upgrade your contracts.

For the following examples, we use the simple `Box` smart contract:

```typescript
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.16;
import "@openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable/proxy/utils/Initializable.sol";

contract Box is Initializable{
    uint256 private value;
    uint256 private secondValue;
    uint256 private thirdValue;

    function initialize(uint256 initValue) public initializer {
        value = initValue;
    }

    // Reads the last stored value
    function retrieve() public view returns (uint256) {
        return value;
    }

    // Stores a new value in the contract
    function store(uint256 newValue) public {
        value = newValue;
        emit ValueChanged(newValue);
    }
    // Emitted when the stored value changes
    event ValueChanged(uint256 newValue);

}
```

> In examples below, we assume that the Box contract is compiled and its artifact loaded using Deployer class from hardhat-zksync-deploy plugin. More info on how to compile and load the contract can be found on the following link: [write-and-deploy-a-contract](https://era.zksync.io/docs/api/hardhat/getting-started.html#write-and-deploy-a-contract).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In examples below, we assume that the Box contract is compiled and its artifact loaded using Deployer class from hardhat-zksync-deploy plugin. More info on how to compile and load the contract can be found in the [Hardhat getting started page](https://era.zksync.io/docs/api/hardhat/getting-started.html#compile-and-deploy-a-contract).
```

We just changed the Hardhat Quickstart so it should point to this link instead

# `hardhat-zksync-upgradable`

> The hardhat-zksync-upgradable plugin is a Hardhat plugin that supports end-to-end pipelines for deploying and updating upgradable smart contracts on the zkSync Era network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `hardhat-zksync-upgradable` plugin is a Hardhat plugin that supports end-to-end pipelines for deploying and updating upgradable smart contracts on the zkSync Era network.
```

> The plugin is based on [@openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades) and [@openzeppelin/upgrades-core](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@openzeppelin/upgrades-core), plugins for deploying and managing upgradeable smart contracts on Ethereum network. The hardhat-zkSync-upgradable plugin provides an easy-to-use interface for interacting with the OpenZeppelin Upgrades Plugins within a Hardhat environment on zkSync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin is based on [@openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades) and [@openzeppelin/upgrades-core](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@openzeppelin/upgrades-core) plugins for deploying and managing upgradeable smart contracts on the Ethereum network. The `hardhat-zkSync-upgradable` plugin provides an easy-to-use interface for interacting with the [OpenZeppelin Upgrades Plugins](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/upgrades-plugins) within a Hardhat environment on zkSync.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Installation

[@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-upgradable](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-upgradable)

::: code-tabs

@tab:active yarn

```bash
yarn add -D @matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-upgradable @openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable @openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades
```

@tab npm

```bash
npm i -D @matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-upgradable
```

:::

## Configuration

After installing it, add the plugin to your `hardhat.config.ts` file:

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import '@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-solc';
import '@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-deploy';
import '@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-upgradable';

import { HardhatUserConfig } from 'hardhat/config';

const config: HardhatUserConfig = {
    zksolc: {

>         version: '1.3.7',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        version: '1.3.8',
```

Author: Changed version to 1.3.7 in the latest commit since right now, we support only this version.
I expect this to change for the first beta version where will support multiple versions, so we will update the config accordingly.

Reviewer: @uF4No fyi

        compilerSource: 'binary',
        settings: {
            optimizer: {
                enabled: true,
            },
        },
    },
    defaultNetwork: 'zkSyncNetwork',
    networks: {
        goerli: {
            zksync: false,
            url: 'http://localhost:3050',
        },
        zkSyncNetwork: {
            zksync: true,
            ethNetwork: 'goerli',
            url: 'http://localhost:8545',
        },
    },
    solidity: {

>         version: '0.8.19',

Reviewer: I guess we need to test this with latest Mac M1, and bring it down if it fails.

Reviewer 2: it should be ok now 😉

Reviewer: 🙏

    },
};

export default config;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

# Deploying Proxies

> The plugin supports two types of proxies: Transparent upgradable proxies and beacon proxies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin supports two types of proxy: Transparent upgradable proxies and beacon proxies.
```

> Upgradability methods are all part of the `zkUpgrades` property in the HardhatRuntimeEnvironment and you only need to interact with it in order to deploy or upgrade your contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgradability methods are all part of the `zkUpgrades` property in the `HardhatRuntimeEnvironment` and you only need to interact with it in order to deploy or upgrade your contracts.
```

> Let's see how you can use proxies in more detail:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example usage
```

> Let's see how you can use proxies in more detail:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For the following examples, we will use the simple "Box" smart contract:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the following examples, we use the simple `Box` smart contract:
```

```typescript
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

> pragma solidity ^0.8.16;

Reviewer: Better to match with solc version in config.

Reviewer 2: as discussed yesterday, it should be ok with the ^

import "@openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable/proxy/utils/Initializable.sol";

contract Box is Initializable{
    uint256 private value;
    uint256 private secondValue;
    uint256 private thirdValue;

    function initialize(uint256 initValue) public initializer {
        value = initValue;
    }

    // Reads the last stored value
    function retrieve() public view returns (uint256) {
        return value;
    }

    // Stores a new value in the contract
    function store(uint256 newValue) public {
        value = newValue;
        emit ValueChanged(newValue);
    }
    // Emitted when the stored value changes
    event ValueChanged(uint256 newValue);

}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Transparent upgradable proxies

Transparent upgradable proxies provide a way to upgrade a smart contract without changing its address or requiring any change in the contract's interaction code. With transparent proxies, a contract's address is owned by a proxy contract, which forwards all calls to the actual contract implementation. When a new implementation is deployed, the proxy can be upgraded to point to the new implementation, allowing for seamless upgrades without requiring changes to the contract's interaction code.

> To deploy a simple upgradable contract on the zkSync local setup, first create a test wallet and add it to the new Deployer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy a simple upgradable contract on zkSync Era local setup, first create a test wallet and add it to the new Deployer.
```

```typescript

  const testMnemonic = 'stuff slice staff easily soup parent arm payment cotton trade scatter struggle';
  const zkWallet = Wallet.fromMnemonic(testMnemonic, "m/44'/60'/0'/0/0");

  const deployer = new Deployer(hre, zkWallet);
```

> After that, simply load the Box artifact and call the `deployProxy` method from the `zkUpgrades` hre property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, load the `Box` artifact and call the `deployProxy` method from the `zkUpgrades` hre property.
```

```typescript

>   const contract = await deployer.loadArtifact(contractName);

Reviewer: are we assuming the user knows how to create the contract? i.e. `contractName` versus `box` here?

Reviewer: Is it worth having a preliminary step that sets this up after ## Configuration? as it is used all the way through..

Author: Added an explanation right below the Box contract on what is expected before it is used in our script, along with linked example on how to do it.

Author: If you think it is necessary, I can also add explicit `yarn hardhat compile` command below it, but I would say linked page explains pretty well how to get started.

Reviewer: SGTM

  await hre.zkUpgrades.deployProxy(deployer.zkWallet, contract, [42], { initializer: 'store' });
```

> And that is it! <br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The `deployProxy` method will deploy your implementation contract on the zkSync network, deploy the proxy admin contract, and finally, deploy the transparent proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `deployProxy` method deploys your implementation contract on zkSync Era, deploys the proxy admin contract, and finally, deploys the transparent proxy.
```

> Here is one example of the whole deploy proxy script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Full deploy proxy script
```

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import { Deployer } from '@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-deploy';
import { Wallet } from 'zksync-web3';

const hre = require('hardhat');

async function main() {
    const contractName = 'Box';
    console.log('Deploying ' + contractName + '...');

    const testMnemonic = 'stuff slice staff easily soup parent arm payment cotton trade scatter struggle';
    const zkWallet = Wallet.fromMnemonic(testMnemonic, "m/44'/60'/0'/0/0");

    const deployer = new Deployer(hre, zkWallet);

    const contract = await deployer.loadArtifact(contractName);
    const box = await hre.zkUpgrades.deployProxy(deployer.zkWallet, contract, [42], { initializer: 'store' });

    await box.deployed();
    console.log(contractName + ' deployed to:', box.address);

    box.connect(zkWallet);
    const value = await box.retrieve();
    console.log('Box value is: ', value.toNumber());
}

main();

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> > **_IMPORTANT NOTE:_** `deployProxy` method (and other deploy/upgrade methods from the zkUpgrades) needs the know which wallet to use to deploy smart contracts. For this reason, the wallet needs to have a configured provider that connects it to the specific zkSync network. This provider is configured in the hardhat config file, by stating the RPC url of the network to connect to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning Important 
- The `deployProxy` method (and other deploy/upgrade methods from the zkUpgrades) needs to know which wallet to use to deploy smart contracts. 
- For this reason, the wallet needs to have a configured provider that connects it to the specific zkSync network.
- The provider is configured in the hardhat config file with the RPC URL of the network.
```

Reviewer: Would it be better to provide the full hardhat config file instead of just a snippet of it?

Author: Are you sure we want to remove the 'note' label from this text and move it under the 'hardhat config' subtitle? I left it in the previous section on purpose because it was directly related to the code and the way '.deployProxy' method receives 'deployer.zkWallet' instead of just 'zkWallet'.

Regarding the full config, I would say there is no need to specify it here, because it is the same hardhat config as stated at the top of this page. I changed the wording as a suggestion on how it can be stated more explicitly. Let me know if that is sufficient.

Reviewer: No, I did not want to do that. Keep the note, but make it a warning instead ... 

:::warning
- `deployProxy` method (and other deploy/upgrade methods from the zkUpgrades) needs to know which wallet to use to deploy smart contracts. 
- For this reason, the wallet needs to have a configured provider that connects it to the specific zkSync network. 
- This provider is configured in the hardhat config file, by stating the RPC url of the network to connect to.
:::

Reviewer: And SGTM.

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

defaultNetwork: 'zkSyncNetwork',
    networks: {
        goerli: {
            zksync: false,
            url: 'http://localhost:3050',
        },
        zkSyncNetwork: {
            zksync: true,
            ethNetwork: 'goerli',
            url: 'http://localhost:8545',
        },
    },

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> Since the provider instatiation is already handled in the creation of the Deployer class based on your hardhat configuration, we can simply pass the `deployer.zkWallet` and be sure that the correct provider is already set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the provider was instantiated on creating the `Deployer` class based on your Hardhat configuration, we only have to pass the `deployer.zkWallet` to be sure that the correct provider is already set.
```

> On the other hand if you need to explicitly set the provider you can do that with the code below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, if you need to explicitly set the provider, do that with the code below:
```

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  import { Provider } from "zksync-web3";

  const provider = new Provider("https://testnet.era.zksync.dev");

  const testMnemonic = 'stuff slice staff easily soup parent arm payment cotton trade scatter struggle';
  const zkWallet = Wallet.fromMnemonic(testMnemonic, "m/44'/60'/0'/0/0");
  zkWallet.connect(provider);

  const deployer = new Deployer(hre, zkWallet);
  ...

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

## Beacon proxies

> Beacon proxies are a more advanced form of proxy that uses an intermediate contract (called the Beacon contract) to delegate calls to a specific implementation contract. Beacon proxies enable a more advanced upgrade pattern, where multiple implementation contracts can be deployed and "hot-swapped" on the fly without any disruption to the contract's operation. This allows for more advanced upgrade patterns, such as adding or removing functionality while minimizing downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beacon proxies are a more advanced form of proxy that use an intermediate contract (called the Beacon contract) to delegate calls to a specific implementation contract. 

Beacon proxies enable a more advanced upgrade pattern, where multiple implementation contracts can be deployed and "hot-swapped" on the fly with no disruption to the contract's operation. 

This allows for more advanced upgrade patterns, such as adding or removing functionality while minimizing downtime.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To use beacon upgradables, start with creating a Deployer for the zkSync network and load the Box artifact:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use beacon upgradables, start by creating a Deployer for the zkSync network and load the Box artifact:
```

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  const testMnemonic = 'stuff slice staff easily soup parent arm payment cotton trade scatter struggle';
  const zkWallet = Wallet.fromMnemonic(testMnemonic, "m/44'/60'/0'/0/0");

  const deployer = new Deployer(hre, zkWallet);

  const boxContract = await deployer.loadArtifact(contractName);

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> After that, you first need to deploy the beacon contract using `deployBeacon` method from the `zkUpgrades`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, deploy the beacon contract using `deployBeacon` method from the `zkUpgrades`
```

```typescript
  await hre.zkUpgrades.deployBeacon(deployer.zkWallet, boxContract);
```

> In the end, use the `deployBeaconProxy` method which receives the zk wallet, beacon contract and the implementation (Box) contract with its arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Use the `deployBeaconProxy` method which receives the zkSync Era wallet, beacon contract, and the implementation (Box) contract with its arguments.
```

```typescript
  const box = await hre.zkUpgrades.deployBeaconProxy(deployer.zkWallet, beacon, boxContract, [42]);
```
After that, your beacon proxy contract is deployed on the network, and you can interact with it.

> The whole deploy beacon script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Full code for deploy beacon
```

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import { Deployer } from '@matterlabs/hardhat-zksync-deploy';
import { Wallet } from 'zksync-web3';

const hre = require('hardhat');

async function main() {
    const contractName = 'Box';
    console.log('Deploying ' + contractName + '...');

    const testMnemonic = 'stuff slice staff easily soup parent arm payment cotton trade scatter struggle';
    const zkWallet = Wallet.fromMnemonic(testMnemonic, "m/44'/60'/0'/0/0");

    const deployer = new Deployer(hre, zkWallet);

    const boxContract = await deployer.loadArtifact(contractName);
    const beacon = await hre.zkUpgrades.deployBeacon(deployer.zkWallet, boxContract);
    await beacon.deployed();
    console.log('Beacon deployed to:', beacon.address);

    const box = await hre.zkUpgrades.deployBeaconProxy(deployer.zkWallet, beacon, boxContract, [42]);
    await box.deployed();
    console.log(contractName + ' beacon proxy deployed to: ', box.address);

    box.connect(zkWallet);
    const value = await box.retrieve();
    console.log('Box value is: ', value.toNumber());
}

main();

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Implementation addresses check

> Once you deploy the proxy contract, all interactions with your implementation contract go through it. If you invoke the deployProxy function multiple times for a single implementation contract, several proxies will be created, but the implementation contract will remain the same for all of them. This means we can optimize the process to check for the existing implementation addresses before deploying a new proxy, instead of deploying a new implementation contract every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you deploy the proxy contract, all interactions with your implementation contract go through it. 

If you invoke the `deployProxy` function multiple times for a single implementation contract, several proxies will be created, but the implementation contract will remain the same for all of them. This means we can optimize the process to check for the existing implementation addresses before deploying a new proxy, instead of deploying a new implementation contract every time.
```

> The upgradable plugin saves this information in the manifest file. This file will be created in your project's `.upgradable` folder. The manifest file is created per network, meaning you will have different data saved for upgrading contracts on the local setup and Era networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgradable plugin saves this information in the manifest file. This file will be created in your project's `.upgradable` folder. The manifest file is created per network, meaning you will have different data saved for upgrading contracts on the local setup and zkSync Era networks.
```

# Upgrading proxies

## Validations

> In order for smart contract implementation to be upgradable, it has to follow specific [rules](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/upgrades-plugins/1.x/writing-upgradeable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for a smart contract implementation to be upgradable, it has to follow specific [rules](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/upgrades-plugins/1.x/writing-upgradeable).
```

> > **__WARNING__** for the current version of the hardhat-zksync-upgradable plugin is that it does <b>NOT</b> yet support all the validation checks.
> > This means that users have the responsibility to check if the new implementation they want to upgrade follows the predefined standards.
> > We are working on implementing those checks within the plugin itself, and the plan for subsequent releases is to support them natively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning
- The current version of the `hardhat-zksync-upgradable` plugin does **NOT** support all the validation checks.
- This means that it is the users responsibility to check if the new implementation they want to upgrade follows the predefined standards.
- At the time of writing, we are working on implementing those checks within the plugin itself, and the plan for subsequent releases is to support them natively.
```

## Upgradable examples

The following examples will use the BoxV2 contract as a new implementation for the Box proxy.

```typescript
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

> pragma solidity ^0.8.16;

Reviewer: 16 in config then for solc?

import "@openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable/proxy/utils/Initializable.sol";

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

contract BoxV2 is Initializable{
    uint256 private value;

    // Emitted when the stored value changes
    event ValueChanged(uint256 newValue);

    function initialize(uint256 initValue) public initializer {
        value = initValue;
    }

    // Stores a new value in the contract
    function store(uint256 newValue) public {
        value = newValue;
        emit ValueChanged(newValue);
    }

    // Reads the last stored value and returns it with a prefix
    function retrieve() public view returns (string memory) {
        return string(abi.encodePacked("V2: ", uint2str(value)));
    }

    // Converts a uint to a string
    function uint2str(uint _i) internal pure returns (string memory) {
        if (_i == 0) {
            return "0";
        }
        uint j = _i;
        uint len;
        while (j != 0) {
            len++;
            j /= 10;
        }
        bytes memory bstr = new bytes(len);
        uint k = len;
        while (_i != 0) {
            k = k - 1;
            uint8 temp = (48 + uint8(_i - (_i / 10) * 10));
            bytes1 b1 = bytes1(temp);
            bstr[k] = b1;
            _i /= 10;
        }
        return string(bstr);
    }
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

## Upgrade transparent proxy

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To upgrade the implementation of the transparent upgradeable contract, use the `upgradeProxy` method from the `zkUpgrades`.

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  const BoxV2 = await deployer.loadArtifact('BoxV2');
  await hre.zkUpgrades.upgradeProxy(deployer.zkWallet, <PROXY_ADDRESS>, BoxV2);

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> `upgradeProxy` receives 3 arguments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

`upgradeProxy` receives 3 arguments:
```

> - A (zk) wallet
> - The address of the previously deployed box proxy
> - The artifact containing the new, Box2 implementation
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A zkSync Era wallet.
- The address of the previously deployed box proxy.
- The artifact containing the new `Box2` implementation.

```

## Upgrade beacon proxy

> Beacon proxy implementation can be upgraded using a similarly structured method from the `zkUpgrades` called `upgradeBeacon`.
> Here is an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beacon proxy implementation can be upgraded using a similarly structured method from the `zkUpgrades` called `upgradeBeacon`. For example:
```

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  const boxV2Implementation = await deployer.loadArtifact('BoxV2');
  await hre.zkUpgrades.upgradeBeacon(deployer.zkWallet, <BEACON_PROXY_ADDRESS>, boxV2Implementation);

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> The example below shows how to deploy and upgrade a smart contract using beacon proxy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below deploys and upgrades a smart contract using beacon proxy:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```typescript

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    // deploy beacon proxy

    const contractName = 'Box';
    const contract = await deployer.loadArtifact(contractName);
    const beacon = await hre.zkUpgrades.deployBeacon(deployer.zkWallet, contract);
    await beacon.deployed();

    const boxBeaconProxy = await hre.zkUpgrades.deployBeaconProxy(deployer.zkWallet, beacon, contract, [42]);
    await boxBeaconProxy.deployed();

    // upgrade beacon

    const boxV2Implementation = await deployer.loadArtifact('BoxV2');
    await hre.zkUpgrades.upgradeBeacon(deployer.zkWallet, beacon.address, boxV2Implementation);
    console.log('Successfully upgraded beacon Box to BoxV2 on address: ', beacon.address);

    const attachTo = new zk.ContractFactory(
        boxV2Implementation.abi,
        boxV2Implementation.bytecode,
        deployer.zkWallet,
        deployer.deploymentType
    );
    const upgradedBox = await attachTo.attach(boxBeaconProxy.address);

    upgradedBox.connect(zkWallet);
    // wait some time before the next call
    await new Promise((resolve) => setTimeout(resolve, 2000));
    const value = await upgradedBox.retrieve();
    console.log('New box value is', value);
}

main();
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
